<div id="wrapper" class="direction-ltr">

<div class="gem-c-contextual-breadcrumbs">

<div class="gem-c-step-nav-header govuk-!-margin-bottom-0"
data-module="track-click">

[Part of]{.gem-c-step-nav-header__part-of} [Education and childcare
during
coronavirus](/coronavirus-taxon/education-and-childcare){.gem-c-step-nav-header__title}

</div>

</div>

<div class="publication-external">

1.  <div class="organisation-logo__inner">

    <div
    class="gem-c-organisation-logo brand--department-for-education">

    [[Department\
    for
    Education]{.gem-c-organisation-logo__name}](/government/organisations/department-for-education){.gem-c-organisation-logo__container
    .gem-c-organisation-logo__link .gem-c-organisation-logo__crest
    .gem-c-organisation-logo__crest--single-identity
    .brand__border-color}

    </div>

    </div>

</div>

<div
class="gem-c-title gem-c-title--inverse govuk-!-margin-top-8 govuk-!-margin-bottom-0">

[ Guidance ]{.govuk-caption-xl .gem-c-title__context}
Actions for education and childcare settings to prepare for wider opening from 1 June 2020 {#actions-for-education-and-childcare-settings-to-prepare-for-wider-opening-from-1-june-2020 .gem-c-title__text}
==========================================================================================

</div>

Updated 1 June 2020

<div id="contents" class="govuk-grid-row sidebar-with-body"
data-module="sticky-element-container">

<div
class="govuk-grid-column-one-quarter-from-desktop contents-list-container">

Contents {#contents .gem-c-contents-list__title}
--------

1.  [Next steps](#next-steps){.gem-c-contents-list__link .govuk-link}
2.  [Year groups in first phase of wider
    opening](#year-groups-in-first-phase-of-wider-opening){.gem-c-contents-list__link
    .govuk-link}
3.  [What the latest science tells
    us](#what-the-latest-science-tells-us){.gem-c-contents-list__link
    .govuk-link}
4.  [Approach: first phase of wider opening of educational and childcare
    settings](#approach-first-phase-of-wider-opening-of-educational-and-childcare-settings){.gem-c-contents-list__link
    .govuk-link}
5.  [Implementation: managing risk and rate of
    transmission](#implementation-managing-risk-and-rate-of-transmission){.gem-c-contents-list__link
    .govuk-link}
6.  [Key issues](#key-issues){.gem-c-contents-list__link .govuk-link}

</div>

<div class="print-wrapper">

<div class="print-meta-data">

![](/assets/government-frontend/open-government-licence-min-e98134ae65ff5fe99a524d8c383350b3998f91c298dc24b36126e65f1656c578.png){.print-meta-data-licence}

© Crown copyright 2020

This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government
Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit
[nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3](https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3)
or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew,
London TW9 4DU, or email: <psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk>.

Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will
need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.

This publication is available at
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/actions-for-educational-and-childcare-settings-to-prepare-for-wider-opening-from-1-june-2020/actions-for-education-and-childcare-settings-to-prepare-for-wider-opening-from-1-june-2020

</div>

</div>

<div class="main-content-container">

<div class="gem-c-govspeak-html-publication">

<div class="gem-c-govspeak govuk-govspeak direction-ltr"
data-module="govspeak">

<div class="govspeak">

<div class="call-to-action">

This guidance has been updated to reflect the announcement by the Prime
Minister that the government’s 5 tests have been met and the decision,
based on all the evidence, to move forward with wider opening of
education and childcare settings.

</div>

As part of national social distancing measures to limit the spread of
coronavirus (COVID-19), we have had to limit the numbers of children and
young people attending educational and childcare settings, to ensure
that pupils and staff attending could do so safely. That is why, since
23 March 2020, education and childcare settings have only been open to
priority groups ([vulnerable
children](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-guidance-on-vulnerable-children-and-young-people){.govuk-link}
and [children of critical
workers](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-maintaining-educational-provision/guidance-for-schools-colleges-and-local-authorities-on-maintaining-educational-provision){.govuk-link})^[1](#fn:1){.govuk-link}^.

As well as offering face-to-face provision for those able to attend,
settings have also done a huge amount to support the remote education of
those who have been staying at home. Innovative and fast-paced work has
taken place, by committed staff, to develop resources to make this
education the best it can be.

Throughout this period, the work and dedication of critical workers has
been crucial to our country. This of course includes all our critical
workers working with children and young people – leaders, teachers,
support staff, childcare workers, social workers and others, who have
worked tirelessly to support the education and welfare of young people.

As a result of the huge efforts everyone has made to adhere to strict
social distancing measures, the government’s 5 tests have been met,
meaning we can move forward with modifying measures which have been in
place. Based on all the evidence, from 1 June 2020 we can welcome back
more children to early years and primary school settings, and from 15
June 2020 to secondary school and further education settings. Schools,
colleges and childcare providers have been planning on this basis, and
confirmation that this could go ahead was provided by the Prime Minister
on 28 May.

We have worked closely with the sector, and will continue to do so over
the coming weeks to support the wider opening of schools, colleges and
childcare settings. In this document we are setting out the overarching
aims and principles of this next phase, including information about
protective measures which will be in place. We have worked with the
profession to produce more detailed guidance to support planning.

Next steps
----------

Education and childcare settings are already open to priority groups.
Now that we have made progress in reducing the transmission of
coronavirus (COVID-19) we are encouraging all eligible children to
attend – it is no longer necessary for parents of eligible children to
keep them at home if they can. In particular, as per the [existing
guidance on vulnerable children and young
people](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-guidance-on-vulnerable-children-and-young-people/coronavirus-covid-19-guidance-on-vulnerable-children-and-young-people){.govuk-link},
vulnerable children of all year groups continue to be expected and
encouraged to attend educational provision where it is appropriate for
them to do so.

From the week commencing 1 June 2020, we are asking primary schools to
welcome back children in nursery, Reception, year 1 and year 6,
alongside priority groups. From 15 June, we are asking secondary
schools, sixth form and further education colleges to offer some
face-to-face support to supplement the remote education of year 10 and
year 12 students and 16 to 19 learners in the first year of their course
who are due to take key exams next year, alongside the full time
provision they are offering to priority groups.

We are also asking nurseries and other early years providers, including
childminders, to begin welcoming back children of all ages from 1 June.
Alternative provision settings should mirror the approach being taken
for mainstream schools and also offer some face-to-face support for year
10 and 11 students (as they have no year 12) from 15 June. Special
schools, special post-16 institutions and hospital schools will work
towards a phased return of more children and young people without a
focus on specific year groups.

We want to get all children and young people back into education as soon
as the scientific advice allows because it is the best place for them to
learn, and because we know how important it is for their mental
wellbeing to have social interactions with their peers, carers and
teachers. Children returning to educational and childcare settings in
greater numbers will also allow more families to return to work.

We are therefore gradually increasing the numbers of children and young
people attending schools and colleges. This decision is based on the
latest scientific advice. By returning pupils gradually, settings can
initially reduce the number of children and young people in classrooms
compared to usual and put protective measures in place to reduce risks.
Children and young people will need to stay within their new class/group
wherever possible and we will ask settings to [implement a range of
protective
measures](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-implementing-protective-measures-in-education-and-childcare-settings){.govuk-link}
including increased cleaning, reducing ‘pinch points’ (such as parents
dropping children off at the start and end of the day), and utilising
outdoor space. Staff and pupils in all settings will be eligible for
testing if they become ill with coronavirus symptoms, as will members of
their households. A negative test will enable children and young people
to get back to childcare or education, and their parents to get back to
work. A positive test will ensure rapid action to protect their
classmates and staff in their setting. Those who are clinically
vulnerable, or are living with someone who is, should follow our
[protective measures
guidance](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-implementing-protective-measures-in-education-and-childcare-settings){.govuk-link}.

In childcare settings, providers can welcome back all children from the
week commencing 1 June 2020. Demand for childcare is likely to be lower
than usual at first, and existing space requirements and staff to child
ratios for these age groups should allow for small group working. Where
the physical layout of a setting does not allow small groups of children
to be kept at a safe distance apart, we expect practitioners to exercise
judgement in ensuring the highest standards of safety are maintained. In
some cases, it may be necessary for providers to introduce a temporary
cap on numbers to ensure that safety is prioritised. From 1 June 2020,
childminders can look after children of all ages, in line with usual
limits on the number of children they can care for.

Year groups in first phase of wider opening
-------------------------------------------

The three year groups within mainstream primary have been prioritised
because they are key transition years – children in Reception and year 1
are at the very beginning of their school career and are mastering the
essential basics, including counting and the fundamentals of reading and
writing, and learning to socialise with their peers. We know that
attending early education lays the foundation for lifelong learning and
supports children’s social and emotional development. Year 6 children
are finishing Key Stage 2 and are preparing for the transition to
secondary school, and will benefit immensely from time with their
friends and teachers to ensure they are ready.

We are prioritising younger children in the first phases of wider
opening, for several reasons. Firstly, because there is moderately high
scientific confidence in evidence suggesting younger children are less
likely to become unwell if infected with coronavirus (COVID-19); and
secondly because evidence shows the particularly detrimental impact
which time spent out of education can have upon them. In addition, older
children are more likely to have higher numbers of contacts outside of
school so pose a greater transmission risk, and they are typically
better able to learn at home.

The two year groups in mainstream secondary schools and colleges have
been prioritised because they are preparing for key examinations next
year, and are most at risk of falling behind due to time out of school
or college. From 15 June 2020, secondary schools and colleges will be
able to offer some face-to-face contact with year 10 and year 12 pupils
or 16 to 19 learners in the first year of a two-year study programme.
This will supplement their remote education, which should remain the
predominant mode of education during this term. Our assessment, based on
the latest scientific and medical advice, is that we need to continue to
control the numbers attending school or further education settings to
reduce the risk of increasing transmission. Therefore, schools are able
to have a quarter of the year 10 and year 12 cohort (for schools with
sixth forms) in school at any one time, and should refer to our guidance
for advice on minimising risk. Likewise, for colleges and other FE
settings, a quarter of 16 to 19 learners in the first year of a two-year
study programme may attend at any one time. Schools and colleges should
also ensure that the use of public transport for travel to and from
school or college is minimised as far as possible. Where it is totally
necessary, this should not be during peak times. Schools should
introduce staggered start and end times as appropriate to help achieve
this.

Our approach is in line with other countries across Europe, who have
begun to bring pre-school and school-age children back in a phased way
and are focusing on primary schools and younger children. Approaches
between countries will vary slightly based on different public health
circumstances.

We expect all mainstream schools and colleges, including independent
schools, to follow the same approach. We encourage middle schools to do
the same and welcome back children in year 6, to ensure national parity
for children in this year group.

Any educational or childcare settings which have closed should work
towards reopening from the week commencing 1 June 2020 to cater for
children in nurseries, Reception, year 1, year 6 and priority groups,
and, from 15 June, to provide some face-to-face support to pupils in
years 10 and 12, and 16 to 19 learners in the first year of their
course.

We have provided all educational and childcare settings with further
guidance and support to help them to prepare for wider opening and
continue to work closely with the sector.

What the latest science tells us
--------------------------------

The above approach is underpinned by our latest understanding of the
science, which indicates that we need to take a phased approach to limit
the risk of increasing the rate of transmission (often referred to as R)
above 1. We have factored in:

-   severity of disease in children – there is high scientific
    confidence that children of all ages have less severe symptoms than
    adults if they contract coronavirus (COVID-19)
-   the age of children – there is moderately high scientific confidence
    that younger children are less likely to become unwell if infected
    with coronavirus (COVID-19)
-   numbers of children going back – which needs to be limited initially
    then increased gradually as the science permits
-   systems to reduce the size of the groups coming into contact with
    each other – such as smaller class sizes spread out across settings

Approach: first phase of wider opening of educational and childcare settings
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

From the week commencing 1 June 2020, we are asking nurseries and other
early years settings to open to children of all ages, and primary
schools to welcome back pupils to nursery, Reception, year 1 and year 6
(including in middle schools). From 15 June, we are asking secondary
schools and colleges to offer some face-to-face support for children and
young people in year 10 and year 12, and 16 to 19 learners in the first
year of their course, to supplement their remote education, alternative
provision to mirror the approach being taken for mainstream schools and
also offer some face-to-face support for year 10 and year 11 students
(as they have no year 12), and special schools, special post-16
institutions and hospital schools to welcome back more pupils and
students.

We will assess the impact of these changes closely, working with medical
and scientific advisers as well as sector leaders. When the most
up-to-date assessment of the risk posed by the virus indicates that it
is appropriate to do so, we will ask more primary year groups to return
to school, and issue revised guidance.

The following principles will apply to this phase of wider opening by
settings:

-   children and young people in eligible year groups are strongly
    encouraged to attend (where there are no shielding concerns for the
    child or their household), so that they can gain the educational and
    wellbeing benefits of attending
-   vulnerable children of all year groups continue to be expected and
    encouraged to attend educational provision where it is appropriate
    for them to do so (for children with education health and care (EHC)
    plans this will be informed by a risk assessment approach)
-   children, young people and staff who have been classed as
    [clinically extremely vulnerable due to pre-existing medical
    conditions](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/guidance-on-shielding-and-protecting-extremely-vulnerable-persons-from-covid-19/covid-19-guidance-on-protecting-people-most-likely-to-get-unwell-from-coronavirus-shielding-young-peoples-version){.govuk-link}
    have been advised to shield. We do not expect people in this
    category to be attending school or college, and they should continue
    to be supported to learn or work at home as much as possible.
    Clinically vulnerable (but not clinically extremely vulnerable)
    people are those considered to be at a higher risk of severe illness
    from coronavirus (COVID-19). Few if any children will fall into this
    category, but parents should follow medical advice if their child is
    in this category. Staff in this category should work from home where
    possible, and refer to the detail in our protective measures
    guidance
-   a child/young person or a member of staff who lives with someone who
    is clinically vulnerable (but not clinically extremely vulnerable),
    including those who are pregnant, can attend their education or
    childcare setting
-   if a child/young person or staff member lives in a household with
    someone who is extremely clinically vulnerable, as set out in the
    [guidance on
    shielding](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/guidance-on-shielding-and-protecting-extremely-vulnerable-persons-from-covid-19){.govuk-link},
    it is advised they only attend an education or childcare setting if
    stringent social distancing can be adhered to and, in the case of
    children, if they are able to understand and follow those
    instructions. This may not be possible for very young children and
    older children without the capacity to adhere to the instructions on
    social distancing. If stringent social distancing cannot be adhered
    to, we do not expect those individuals to attend. They should be
    supported to learn or work at home
-   staff and children or young people should not attend if they have
    symptoms or are self-isolating due to symptoms in their household
-   protective measures will be put in place for staff and pupils, as
    far as is possible, to ensure that the risk of transmission is
    reduced

Implementation: managing risk and rate of transmission
------------------------------------------------------

Scientific advice indicates that a phased return that limits the number
of children in education settings and how much they mix with each other
will help to control the rate of transmission. This is set out in [our
guidance](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-implementing-protective-measures-in-education-and-childcare-settings){.govuk-link}.

There are a number of immediate issues which educational and childcare
settings will need to consider. The following list of issues are the
ones we have identified as the top priorities. We recognise that each
setting and community is different, and that leaders will need to make
their own judgements on the most important issues for them. We have
published further advice for early years, primary schools, secondary
schools and further education settings to help them prepare.

Key issues
----------

### Risk assessment

Every setting should carry out a risk assessment before opening. The
assessment should directly address risks associated with coronavirus
(COVID-19), so that sensible measures can be put in place to control
those risks for children and staff. All employers have a duty to consult
employees on health and safety, and they are best placed to understand
the risks in individual settings.

### Class sizes and staff availability

One of the protective measures we can take to reduce transmission is to
have smaller group and class sizes. We know that, unlike older children
and adults, early years and primary age children cannot be expected to
remain 2 metres apart from each other and staff. In deciding to bring
more children back to early years and schools, we are taking this into
account. Schools should therefore work through the hierarchy of measures
set out in our
[guidance](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-implementing-protective-measures-in-education-and-childcare-settings){.govuk-link}:

-   avoiding contact with anyone with symptoms
-   frequent hand cleaning and good hygiene practices
-   regular cleaning of settings
-   and minimising contact and mixing as far as possible

As well as the measures above, secondary schools and colleges should:

-   ensure that only a quarter of pupils in year 10 and year 12 are in
    school at any one time
-   aim to practise social distancing in line with the measures the
    government is asking everyone to adopt in public and in workplaces,
    including keeping pupils 2 metres apart from each other where
    possible
-   plan that classes are no more than half their usual size, to allow
    sufficient distancing between pupils. However, this may vary due to
    individual school circumstances

It is still important to reduce contact between children and staff as
far as possible, and settings can take steps to achieve that and reduce
transmission risk by ensuring children, and staff where possible, mix in
a small group and keep that small group away from other people and
groups. For pre-school children in early years settings, the staff to
child ratios within Early Years Foundation Stage continue to apply, and
we recommend using these to group children. In mainstream primary
schools the basic principle is that classes should be halved. Normally
one teacher should be allocated to a group but if there are any teacher
shortages then support staff may be used to lead groups, under the
direction of a teacher. In mainstream secondary schools and colleges, we
recognise that the range of subjects and courses taught means that some
mixing may be unavoidable to provide pupils with face-to-face support
from subject/specialist teachers. We would expect that these groups are
still smaller than normal. More detail is provided in our [protective
measures
guidance](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-implementing-protective-measures-in-education-and-childcare-settings){.govuk-link}.

Public Health England are clear that if early years, school and college
settings do this, and crucially if they also apply comprehensive
infection control measures, such as taking steps to ensure symptomatic
individuals do not attend settings, regular hand cleaning, respiratory
hygiene and cleaning measures and handling potential cases of the virus
as per our advice, then the risk of transmission will be lowered.

Where settings can keep children and young people in those small groups
2m away from each other, they should do so. While in general groups
should be kept apart, brief, transitory, contact such as passing in a
corridor is low risk.

Each setting’s circumstances will be slightly different. Any setting
that cannot achieve these small groups at any point should discuss
options with their local authority or trust. This might be because there
are not enough classrooms / spaces available in the setting or because
they do not have enough available teachers / staff to supervise the
groups. Solutions might involve children attending a nearby school (on a
consistent basis). If necessary, settings have the flexibility to focus
first on continuing to provide places for priority groups and then, to
support children’s early learning, settings should prioritise groups of
children as follows:

-   early years settings – 3 and 4 year olds followed by younger age
    groups
-   infant schools - nursery (where applicable) and reception
-   primary schools – nursery (where applicable), reception and year 1

### Protective measures in education and childcare settings

The DfE guidance on [Implementing Protective Measures in Education and
Childcare
Settings](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-implementing-protective-measures-in-education-and-childcare-settings){.govuk-link}
contains detailed advice for settings on:

-   cleaning, including supplies of cleaning and handwashing products
-   testing and tracing
-   personal protective equipment (PPE)
-   what settings should do in response to a case of coronavirus
    (COVID-19) being confirmed

### Attendance

No one with symptoms should attend a setting for any reason. Eligible
children and young people - including priority groups - are strongly
encouraged to attend their education setting, unless they are
self-isolating or they are clinically vulnerable (in which case they
should follow medical advice). If someone in their household is
extremely clinically vulnerable, they should only attend if stringent
social distancing can be adhered to, and the child is able to understand
and follow those instructions. Families should notify their
nursery/school/college as normal if their child is unable to attend so
that staff can explore the reason with them and address barriers
together. Parents will not be fined for non-attendance at this time, and
schools and colleges will not be held to account for attendance levels.
Schools and colleges should continue to inform social workers where
children with a social worker do not attend.

Schools and colleges should resume taking their attendance register and
continue to complete the online Educational Setting Status form which
gives the Department for Education daily updates on how many children
and staff are attending. The Department will continue to monitor
attendance at early years settings, via local authorities. This is to
ensure that we have up-to-date information on available early years and
childcare provision during the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak, which
children are accessing it and to monitor sufficiency in particular
areas.

### Vulnerable children and young people

There is a continuing expectation that vulnerable children and young
people of all year groups will attend educational or childcare
provision, where it is safe and appropriate for them do so. As per the
current guidance, where these children and young people are currently
not attending but attendance is appropriate, we expect providers and
local authorities to consider how to encourage their attendance.

Vulnerable children and young people in this context include those who:

-   are assessed as being in need under section 17 of the Children Act
    1989, including children who have a child in need plan, a child
    protection plan or who are a looked-after child. Attendance is
    expected, unless their social worker decides that they are at less
    risk at home or in their placement. The educational provider should
    notify the social worker in cases where these children or young
    people do not take up their place at school or college

-   have an education, health and care (EHC) plan and it is determined,
    following a risk assessment, carried out with educational providers
    and parents, that their needs can be as safely or more safely met in
    the educational environment

-   have been assessed as otherwise vulnerable by educational providers
    or local authorities (including children’s social care services),
    and who are therefore in need of continued education provision -
    this might include children on the edge of receiving support from
    children’s social care services, adopted children, those at risk of
    becoming NEET (‘not in employment, education or training’), those
    who are young carers and others at the provider and local
    authority’s discretion

### Alternative Provision

Alternative Provision (AP) settings should follow the same principles
and guidance as mainstream schools and welcome back, from 1 June 2020,
all children in Reception, year 1 and year 6. AP settings do not have a
year 12, so, from 15 June, they they should also offer some face to face
support for students in year 10 and year 11 to supplement their remote
education, as they are approaching key transition points. In line with
the advice above for mainstream provision, settings should limit the
numbers in attendance at any one time and aim to keep students in small
groups as [set out in our
guidance](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-implementing-protective-measures-in-education-and-childcare-settings){.govuk-link}.
Settings should also consider ways to minimise use of public transport
to get to and from school at peak times, in consultation with local
authorities. Priority groups of all ages should continue to be offered a
place and strongly encouraged to attend.

### Special schools

Special schools, special post-16 institutions and hospital schools
should work towards welcoming back as many children and young people as
can be safely catered for in their setting. They may want to prioritise
attendance based on key transitions and the impact on life chances and
development, and to consider creating part-time attendance rotas so that
as many children as possible can benefit from attending their setting.
Special settings should work with local authorities and families to
ensure that decisions about attendance are informed by existing risk
assessments for their children and young people, which should be kept up
to date.

### Sixth form and further education (FE) colleges

From 15 June, further education settings (including general further
education colleges, sixth form colleges, and other providers) can offer
face-to-face support to 16 to 19 learners. Remote education should
remain the predominant mode of learning during this time. To help reduce
the coronavirus (COVID-19) transmission risk, the number of learners
attending at any one time will be limited to a quarter of those on the
first year of a two-year 16 to 19 study programme. Further guidance is
available
[here](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-maintaining-further-education-provision/maintaining-education-and-skills-training-provision-further-education-providers){.govuk-link}.

### Curriculum

The Early Years Foundation Stage (EYFS) sets the standards that schools
and childcare settings must meet for the learning, development and care
of children from birth to 5 years old. Early years settings should use
reasonable endeavours to deliver the learning and development
requirements as far as possible in the current circumstances, as [set
out
here](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/early-years-foundation-stage-framework--2/early-years-foundation-stage-coronavirus-disapplications){.govuk-link}.

Schools and colleges continue to be best placed to make decisions about
how to support and educate all their pupils during this period, based on
the local context and staff capacity.

Where year groups are returning to school, we would expect school
leaders and teachers to:

-   consider their pupils’ mental health and wellbeing and identify any
    pupil who may need additional support so they are ready to learn
-   assess where pupils are in their learning, and agree what
    adjustments may be needed to the school curriculum over the coming
    weeks
-   identify and plan how best to support the education of high needs
    groups, including disadvantaged pupils, and SEND and vulnerable
    pupils
-   support pupils in Year 6, who will need both their primary and
    secondary schools to work together to support their upcoming
    transition to Year 7

Schools should use best endeavours to support pupils attending school as
well as those remaining at home, making use of the available [remote
education
support](https://www.gov.uk/guidance/remote-education-during-coronavirus-covid-19){.govuk-link}.

No school will be penalised if they are unable to offer a broad and
balanced curriculum to their pupils during this period.

### Priority groups

Settings will need to consider how they integrate children and young
people from priority groups who are attending but not in any of the
transition year groups into their education offer. Settings have the
flexibility to make the right decision for their circumstances on how
these pupils are supervised, continue to learn and are supported in
school.

### Assessment and accountability

There are no changes to the previously announced expectations on
assessment and accountability. No examinations or assessments will take
place this term and Ofsted will continue to pause routine inspection.

### Staff workload and wellbeing

Governing boards and senior leaders should be conscious of the wellbeing
of all staff, including senior leaders themselves, and the need to
implement flexible working practices in a way that promotes good
work-life balance and supports teachers and leaders.

Workload should be carefully managed and schools and colleges should
assess whether staff who are having to stay at home due to health
conditions are able to support remote education, while others focus on
face-to-face provision. Senior leaders and boards will want to factor
this into their resource and curriculum planning, and consider where
additional resource could be safely brought in if necessary.

### Transport

Parents and children and young people should be encouraged to walk or
cycle where possible, and avoid public transport at peak times.

They should refer to [guidance on safe travel, particularly on public
transport](https://www.gov.uk/guidance/coronavirus-covid-19-safer-travel-guidance-for-passengers){.govuk-link}.

Home to school transport provided or organised by schools, trusts or
local authorities varies widely. Schools, trusts and local authorities
should work together and with relevant transport providers to put in
place arrangements which fit the local circumstances, including the
measures being put in place to reduce contact.

Further guidance is available in [Guidance on implementing protective
measures](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-implementing-protective-measures-in-education-and-childcare-settings){.govuk-link}.

### Food

Schools should provide meals for all children in school, and meals
should be available free of charge where pupils meet the free school
meal (FSM) eligibility criteria. To ensure food is available for pupils
who attend, educational settings are expected to reopen their kitchens
and ensure that meals are able to be prepared and served safely.

We are also continuing to ask schools to work with their food providers
to offer meals or food parcels for benefits-related free school meal
pupils not in school. Now that schools are opening more widely, school
catering teams will be better placed to do this. The provision of food
vouchers for those eligible under the benefits criteria will also
continue to be available where needed. Information on supporting those
in FE with free meals is in the [FE operational
guidance](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-maintaining-further-education-provision){.govuk-link}.

### Costs associated with opening for more children and young people

As previously confirmed, schools will continue to receive their core
funding allocations – as determined by the local authority for
maintained schools and through the general annual grant (GAG) for
academies. FE colleges continue to receive funding in line with the
flexibilities that have been announced in recent weeks including payment
on profile for 16 to 19 study programmes without reconciliation. In
addition, we have announced a fund for schools to cover specific
additional costs as a result of the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak –
this remains open and should be used by schools as appropriate. Access
to the wider business support schemes, including Coronavirus Job
Retention Scheme (CJRS), can continue to be used for staff typically
paid for through private income, on condition that the principles in
Department for Education’s [sector specific
guidance](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-financial-support-for-education-early-years-and-childrens-social-care/coronavirus-covid-19-financial-support-for-education-early-years-and-childrens-social-care){.govuk-link}
continue to be met.

For early years settings, the dedicated schools grant (DSG) should
continue to be paid by local authorities for provision of free
entitlements. Where parents are accessing hours beyond the free
entitlements they are eligible for, early year providers should continue
to charge parents in the normal way. The wider business support packages
can continue to be used as appropriate, including the loan schemes and
the Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme (CJRS), on condition that the
principles in Department for Education’s [sector specific
guidance](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-financial-support-for-education-early-years-and-childrens-social-care/coronavirus-covid-19-financial-support-for-education-early-years-and-childrens-social-care){.govuk-link}
continue to be met.

We are continuing to work with the childcare sector to understand how
the early years sector can best be supported to ensure that sufficient
safe, appropriate and affordable childcare is available for those
returning to work now, and for all families who need it in the longer
term.

### Further guidance and support

We have published:

-   [supporting guidance on protective measures which should be
    implemented in education
    settings](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-implementing-protective-measures-in-education-and-childcare-settings){.govuk-link}
-   [guidance for parents and
    carers](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/closure-of-educational-settings-information-for-parents-and-carers){.govuk-link}
-   [a planning guide for early years and childcare
    settings](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/preparing-for-the-wider-opening-of-early-years-and-childcare-settings-from-1-june){.govuk-link}
-   [a planning guide for primary
    schools](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/preparing-for-the-wider-opening-of-schools-from-1-june/planning-guide-for-primary-schools){.govuk-link}
-   [guidance for secondary school
    provision](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/preparing-for-the-wider-opening-of-schools-from-1-june/planning-guide-for-secondary-schools){.govuk-link}
-   [guidance for further education
    providers](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-maintaining-further-education-provision){.govuk-link}

This complements the [existing guidance for schools and educational
settings](https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/coronavirus-covid-19-guidance-for-schools-and-other-educational-settings){.govuk-link}
that continues to be relevant (and which will be updated in due course
where needed).

<div class="footnotes">

1.  <div id="fn:1">

    </div>

    Throughout this document there is a distinction made between
    ‘vulnerable children’ which has a wide definition as [described in
    this
    link](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-guidance-on-vulnerable-children-and-young-people){.govuk-link}
    and in the relevant section below; and those who are ‘clinically
    vulnerable’ to coronavirus (COVID-19). [↩](#fnref:1){.govuk-link}

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="govuk-sticky-element" data-sticky-element="">

Contents

</div>

</div>

<div class="gem-c-feedback" data-module="feedback">

<div class="gem-c-feedback__prompt gem-c-feedback__js-show js-prompt"
tabindex="-1">

<div class="gem-c-feedback__prompt-questions js-prompt-questions">

Is this page useful? {#is-this-page-useful .gem-c-feedback__prompt-question}
--------------------

[Maybe](/contact/govuk){.gem-c-feedback__prompt-link}
-   [Yes [this page is
    useful]{.govuk-visually-hidden}](/contact/govuk){.gem-c-feedback__prompt-link
    .js-page-is-useful}
-   [No [this page is not
    useful]{.govuk-visually-hidden}](/contact/govuk){.gem-c-feedback__prompt-link
    .js-toggle-form .js-page-is-not-useful}

</div>

<div
class="gem-c-feedback__prompt-questions gem-c-feedback__prompt-success js-prompt-success js-hidden"
tabindex="-1">

Thank you for your feedback

</div>

<div
class="gem-c-feedback__prompt-questions gem-c-feedback__prompt-questions--something-is-wrong js-prompt-questions">

[Is there anything wrong with this
page?](/contact/govuk){.gem-c-feedback__prompt-link .js-toggle-form
.js-something-is-wrong}

</div>

</div>

[Close](#){.gem-c-feedback__close .gem-c-feedback__js-show
.js-close-form}
<div class="govuk-grid-row">

<div class="govuk-grid-column-two-thirds">

<div
class="gem-c-feedback__error-summary gem-c-feedback__js-show js-hidden js-errors"
tabindex="-1">

</div>

### Help us improve GOV.UK {#help-us-improve-gov.uk .gem-c-feedback__form-heading}

Don’t include personal or financial information like your National
Insurance number or credit card details.

<div class="govuk-form-group">

What were you doing?

</div>

<div class="govuk-form-group">

What went wrong?

</div>

Send

</div>

</div>

[Close](#){.gem-c-feedback__close .js-close-form}
<div class="govuk-grid-row">

<div id="survey-wrapper" class="govuk-grid-column-two-thirds">

<div class="gem-c-feedback__error-summary js-hidden js-errors"
tabindex="-1">

</div>

### Help us improve GOV.UK {#help-us-improve-gov.uk-1 .gem-c-feedback__form-heading}

To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit
today. We’ll send you a link to a feedback form. It will take only 2
minutes to fill in. Don’t worry we won’t send you spam or share your
email address with anyone.

<div class="govuk-form-group">

Email address

</div>

Send me the survey

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>
